---
title: "Brainstorming Assemblies"
date: 2019-07-20
categories: 
  - "nature"
tags: 
  - "dipole-quote"
  - "not-linked-mined-2023-h1"
---

Let's brainstorm on the structure and wave equations of the assemblies of standard matter-energy. There are only two fundamental charged objects — the electrino and positrino. Assemblies have a formula specifying the number of electrinos and positrinos. The composite particle with a 1:1 formula (electrinos before the ':', positrinos after) is an electrino-positrino binary. 1:1 may also be a packed configuration at or near Planck scale in an SMBH core. I imagine the last several energy layers before Planck scale may have specific packed geometries (with faults of course). Besides the formula, a composite particle also has a structure.

All assemblies have a neutral nexted tri-binary engine called a Noether core. Time and space are permeated by pro and anti Noether cores forming spacetime æther assemblies with low apparent energy. Another capability Noether cores is coupling to weak personality charges.

The square of the wave equation $latex \\mathbf{\\psi^2} &s=2$ is the probability density of finding the particle at a specific "location" and time. Yet quantum mechanics (QM) says standard model particles are indivisible. So I'm not sure how to translate "location" to an assembly. Also, each assembly experiences its own rate of time as a function of its energy. The higher the energy the slower the time, and vice versa.

Each charge in the binary is chasing the shadow of the potential field emitted by its partner. This mechanism scales to the Planck units, by the electromagnetic attraction of each particle in the binary to the point where the partner **_appears_** to be. However, where the particle appears to be is where it was delta time in the past where delta is given by the field speed @ and the chord traveled.

> _Gauss's law for magnetism states that there are no "magnetic charges" (also called magnetic monopoles), analogous to electric charges. Instead, the magnetic field due to materials is generated by a configuration called a dipole, and the net outflow of the magnetic field through any closed surface is zero._
> 
> Wikipedia

Free particles tend to "seek" lower energy states and will transfer energy when given lower energy degrees of freedom. When particles are confined and energy is added, the particles seek higher energy states and that may be via geometry, spin, excited subassemblies, electromagnetic storage, or decomposition and reformulation.

What is the highest energy configuration of a volume electrino-positrino binaries in a black hole core? Do the binaries separate and arrange themselves according to charge? Is that the ultimate configuration considering like particles repel? Force them to be adjacent?

_Aside: the North-South terminology of magnetism is anthropocentric relative to scientists on Earth._

Maybe the Planck point charge core is like a giant battery with alternating layers of electrinos and positrinos. Actually that makes a lot of sense from the point of view of energy storage. If the binaries are all aligned establishing a polar charge distribution, then does this build in parallel and in series? Does it need to be planes of charge? Or does a spherical alternating charge shell geometry store more energy? Are point charges packed in a crystal-like geometry? Face centered cubic (FCC)? How does the core configuration relate to the magnetic field of the black hole?


