---
title: "Bonded Vortices"
categories: 
  - "nature"
draft: true
---

It occurs to me that a pair of orbiting point potential binaries may bond their potential vortices in a contra-rotating geometry. If so, it would explain quite a lot and tie things together.

- If you imagine an orbiting binary like a clear clock face.
    - One side of the binary it appears to be rotating clockwise.
    
    - The other side of the clock face it appears to be rotating counter-clockwise.

- When a binary is bonded to another binary in a contra-rotating geometry, that means it's remaining vortex is also in the relationship.

- There are two ways to make a contra rotating bond
    - CW side of binary 1 bonds with the CW side of binary 2.
    
    - CCW side of binary 1 bonds with the CCW side of binary 2.

- The fascinating part of this is that the polarity changes
    - CW-O-CCW === CCW-O-CW
    
    - CCW-O-CW === CW-O-CCW

- Note what happened there.
    - We had a binary structure CW-O-CCW
    
    - And the bond created an assembly where both ends are the same from either side.

- How long can these chains go?

- They probably aren't at the same frequency.

- So it is like a transmission.

- Aha. This is making a lot of sense.

- Is this how energy is transferred in or out of a Noether core.

- So an energy transferring bond or force.

- And the point potentials weakly bonded in the vortices.

- This is a powerful engagement mechanism for assemblies.

- What are the common scenarios?
    - percentage of the nucleons engaged with spacetime?
    
    - the idea is that since everything is always emitting black body radiation that means everything’s protons neutrons and electrons are engaged with space time assemblies and sometimes a photon is generated.  Spinning them up or vice versa. This is part of the mass mechanism.  
    
    - percentage of the electrons engaged with spacetime?
    
    - is this part of the photon creation process?
    
    - When an assembly sheds energy as photons, is it winding up a Higgs assembly or the pro/anti Noether core?
    
    - In a nucleon we have some polar vortexes engaged internally as gluons.

- The pro and anti noether core couple slightly at bonding sites where potential leaks. This is a stronger bond than nestling with another pro/anti pair. 

* * *

> **Nuclear fission** is a reaction in which the nucleus of an atom splits into two or more smaller nuclei. The fission process often produces gamma photons and releases a very large amount of energy even by the energetic standards of radioactive decay¹.
> 
> The energy released comes from the conversion of mass into energy, according to Albert Einstein’s famous formula: **E = mc2**. According to this formula, the amount of energy created is equal to the amount of mass that is converted multiplied by the speed of light squared.
> 
> Source: Conversation with Bing, 7/26/2023  
> (1) Nuclear fission - Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear\_fission.

I am thinking if that energy is being released it must come from high energy Noether cores. It is possible the heavier elements require a higher energy Noether core to exist. If their Noether core has too much energy it sheds it as photons or other radiation, i.e. possibly releasing an alpha or beta particle.

The interesting question is how this trades mass and energy. Mass = apparent energy. The change in mass between the reactants and products yields the amount of mass that was converted to energy. So that is really important. The math :

- Ea1/c^2 = M1 (mass of reactants)

- Ea2/c^2 = M2 (mass of products)

- M1 - M2 = (Ea1 - Ea2)/c^2 = released as "massless" photons

- It seems to imply that the resulting Noether cores have more shielded energy than needed and thus shed energy by spinning up Higgs into photons.

- Does this imply that the ratio Ea/Etotal is maintained?

- Is this possibly related to the idea that the gen II binary is somehow cruising at v = @?

- Yet is interesting that to us e=mc2 and there appears to be a strict accounting in terms of PE and KE.

- For example, the mass defect in nuclei vs. P and N masses. It is claimed that when these nuclei were formed that the reaction emitted balancing energy in terms of photons and that the kinetic energy of the assembly may account for the remainder.

- This is all very interesting because of the implications regarding shielded energy. Just how well shielded are Noether cores? I was thinking that there must be ways to transfer energy back and forth from the Noether core to the personality point potentials and to the point potentials in a coupled vortex.

- It must be the case that e=mc2 in the v=0 case. Then we need to moving case to see how mass energy must expose itself.

- The shielded energy has mass = zero, that's what it means to be shielded energy. So how do we reconcile this? Shielded energy can reveal itself anywhere along the e=mc2 relation? Shielded energy is actually the same stuff, just subject to superposition. It wouldn't make sense to talk about shielded mass, because mass is related to an engagement with the spacetime aether.

- I still feel like I missing something.

- E = m0c2

- Energy momentum relation E2 = (pc)2 + (m0c2)2

- where p = m0v

- E2 = (m0vc)2 + (m0c2)2

- E2 = m02 \[(vc)2 + (c2)2\]

- E2 = m02c2 \[v2 + c2\]

- E = m0c \[v2 + c2\]\-1/2

Likewise, if a Noether core has less energy than required to maintain stability the atom may decay. Wild idea : is half-life related to redshift by any chance? Everything is always red-shifting to some degree. Also how does black body radiation play into this? Temperature?

This upside-down orientation is more intuitive to me. It's really saying that the minimum energy condition for binding is for Fe56.

- The light elements release energy when they combine.

- The heavy elements release energy when they decay.

My guess is that we don't need fusion or fission. We need technology that can harness the energy in the Noether core. Essentially we need to create a photon cascade and capture that energy.
