---
title: "Mo Math Ramblings"
categories: 
  - "nature"
tags: 
  - "priority"
draft: true
---

in terms of equations, I need to continue to separate the tangent velocity portion and the radial portion in relation to the emitter.

The tangent velocity portion is going to be exactly what is needed to keep binary potentials on the circular orbit or at least within that patch of rotationally constant potential (?).  

Perturbation makes the fields change and this is what causes the feedback response in the binary. Perhaps an interaction with another binary or at higher levels a passing photon, etc.

the tangent portion of the force from the partner is controlling the velocity, which controls the emission magnitude.

the radial portion to the center of the binary orbit controls the radius.

Superposition is a lovely thing. This is an example where a superposition of those two actions could be two point potentials, or a zillion point potentials. The only remaining question is whether the local potential surface plays into the equation. I am thinking (hoping) because it is simple and nature likes simple and moreover because the local field could have a tremendous amount of variation over different scenarios. So that seems to argue that the gradients of the local potential surface should be immaterial. In the differential equations only the Dirac sphere stream magnitude matters. Wow that is so cool if it works out. Breaking it down by tangential and radial allows us to look at a constant potential path tangentially for integer r with a symmetry breaking point between every r and r + 1. Then the radial action is just on a standard 1/r potential curve which we know how to calculate the action.

The idea of two potential shooting cannons where the offset of each could be synchronously adjusted from 1 to Fb and designed to meet at x=0, y=r and y=-r.

One h-bar should match both the angular displacement from the local extremes of the tangent angle (between the binary radial and the chord line of action) where the tangential momentum match.

That said as an aside, I've always wondered if h-bar is actually a constant or if it is also variable inside of Einstein's spacetime geometry. i.e., does it really only take an h-bar to crank the radius down from r=2 to r=1?

Maybe we should just build out the equations in r, where r=1 is at pi @ / 2

What I am trying to say is that as we move between r and r + 1 or vice versa, there is a change in the binary orbital dynamics.

If r is decreasing the orbital velocity must increase, and vice versa.

Essential, we are looking for the angles theta, where the v(i) is sufficient to maintain orbit r(i).

And since we know the force from the falloff of potential, we can calculate the difference between two stable positions and the path lag.

I think we are looking to match the tangential force at the action point from theta(i) to theta (ii)

Which is really interesting because theta returns towards it’s previous position once the force tips.

does this mean that for superposition to work in our universe the superposition has to be at the logarithmic or exponential level?  Yeah, that would make a lot of sense for scaling. It also makes a lot of sense for the scalable binaries and Noether cores.

f(x + y) = f(x) + f(y)

ln (x \* y) = ln(x) + ln(y)

e^ln(x) = x

I'm trying to get to the point where we can replace our Einsteinian view of scale with natural logarithm in these basic cases because we know that superposition works.

so what does that mean???

the central theorem of the universe is that ln(x \* y) = ln(x + y)???

which means what x \* y = x + y???

apparently there are non-linear systems which have superposition. Phew!

* * *

I've been looking at partial differential equations and that might be what we are looking for.

Because the concepts of the point potential universe do tie into the time rate of change of point potential kinetic and potential energies.

An ideal binary does a lot of interesting things. The net linear momentum is zero. Kinetic energy in one vector may be converted to kinetic energy on another vector path. Yet we can also trade kinetic energy for potential energy.

do I have a terminology conflict here? point potential vs. potential and kinetic energy.

arghh, do I need to find some middle ground like point charge that emits potential. So wordy.

I really do prefer "point potential" It sort of implies that the potential is always there, always shining, always flowing. Whether electrino or positrino.

i'm not really sure potential and kinetic energy are a thing anymore anyway.

we may need to reorient to a different basis.

the missing concept is that potential is flowing at a constant rate from each point potential

an orbiting binary is a continuous source of energy via its superimposed potential sphere stream.

so I do need to reorient everyone to a different way of thinking.

so what is really conserved? the abstract KE and PE and their tradeoff? Do we need to worry about vector direction when it comes to energy?

Yeah, that seems like how it is mostly treated. It is interesting to understand why.

What is the core principle anyway? We have an equal number of constant rate fountains of potential energy at a certain density (both physically and kinetically) that we can measure relative to the highest curvature binary. Do we only need the velocity of the point charges? Why would we need to know their potential energy relationship with every point charge in the universe? It doesn't matter in the geometrical equations. We only need velocity for the emitter and receiver.

What exactly is conserved? Total KE? Doesn't it sum to zero anyway if we look at it directionally?

the binary is already shown to be a constant source of new potential energy

but the binary can also gain or lose kinetic energy in the form of velocity and this will change the potential emissions.

So perhaps this is the fundamental conservation mechanism.

you can define the universe by the eightball for all point potentials.

so the question is what conservation rules govern the emergence from such a starting point.

* * *

If the formula gives the exact amount of ENERGY emitted at a particular wavelength, then can we convert this to photons, via Ephoton=hf?  Then ENERGY/Ephoton = photons.

i'm still thinking that v=@pi/2 is the smallest radius and corresponds to Planck scale. That means Fp. But does permittivity and permeability cause things contract and dilate? Or is that only in the leadup to v=c?

And this all raises the whole question of total v, including both transverse and line of travel.

v=@ should be where the Noether core goes planar.

orbital v = @ may correspond with the peak of the black body curve.

At that point it's only photon's that are stable.

When work is done on a Noether core to change it's velocity it is like loading a spring as the orbital planes change. When there is a collision, all that energy is released.  
What happens to rest mass? It seems as if apparent energy is decreasing as velocity increases if it is heading towards a planar geometry or is that only for photons and not single noether core assembles.

So up to v=c we have the orbital angles changing and the Noether core shrinking. Beyond v=c we have the Noether core shrinking.

