---
title: "Kirsten Hacker : Weary Light"
date: 2020-02-16
categories: 
  - "nature"
tags: 
  - "linked"
---

This post is a response to [Kirsten](https://kirstenhacker.wordpress.com/)'s article and video "[Weary Light](https://kirstenhacker.wordpress.com/2020/01/23/weary-light-2/)." 

https://youtu.be/PPAprod13\_Y

The subject of Kirsten's blog/vlog is whether photons lose energy, and if speed of light is a constant or variable in free space, e.g., a vacuum or quantum vacuum. In Einstein's theory of relativity, the speed of light is defined as a constant and spacetime is defined as a geometry that curves. Einstein’s spacetime can expand and cause photon redshift. In tired light theories, light can lose energy as it travels, and space can be considered to be the far more intuitive 3-D Euclidean space.

In **NPQG**, spacetime is implemented with a dense sea of particles with low apparent energy, which possibly include photons, neutrinos, gravitons, and axions. Spacetime is an æther that permeates nearly everything in the universe, from low energy spacetime voids all the way to the very highest energy, the Planck energy, in some black holes. **NPQG** espouses that a true understanding of the spacetime æther is the key missing element that helps explain nature with a straightforward narrative that is compatible with general relativity and quantum mechanics mathematics and experiments, yet discards the nonsense narratives of physics and cosmology at the end of the GR-QM era circa 2020 (e.g., one-time inflationary big bang, expanding universe, 13.8 billion year universe age, curvy spacetime, singularities, wormholes, many worlds, etc.).

Spacetime æther particles are net neutral structures made of electrinos and positrinos, the fundamental point charges, and carry energy in electromagnetic and kinetic forms. As observed from the flat 3D+T Euclidean space and time background of the universe, local speed of light depends on the energy and energy gradient of the spacetime æther, and this relationship is mediated by emergent permittivity ($latex \\mathbf{ \\epsilon } &s=1$) and permeability ($latex \\mathbf{ \\mu } &s=1$) of spacetime æther. GR-QM era science mistakenly uses constants for the permittivity and permeability of the vacuum of free space. Yet if we realize that these factors change with the energy of spacetime æther, then the speed of light also changes according to the following formula:

$latex \\mathbf{c^{2}= \\frac {1}{ \\sqrt{ \\epsilon \\mu }}} &s=3$

As any particle changes energy, its Noether core volume dilates or contracts depending on the velocities of the tri binaries in the core. Think of it this way — as the particle gains energy the core has to be stronger to maintain stability — the speed of the electrinos and positrinos in the shell increases, and the radius decreases. However, in the low apparent energy aether, the Noether core shrinks again. This variability in spacetime particle size is how spacetime æther implements Einstein's curvy geometry.

This combination of effects from the speed of the point charges in the Noether core, the variation in Noether core radius, and the local permittivity and permeability, at points of action defined by centers of point charges, work together to implement the theory of Einstein intuitively and naturally. Lensing of light around a massive object is simple refraction, as the photons slow in the vicinity and then gain speed again.

7 :00 : At this point in the video, Kirsten has demonstrated that Einstein's assumption and language created confusion that very few people outside the field can truly understand. She's building the case that a transformation to a tired-light cosmology is more intuitive and understandable.

8 :30 — Kirsten discusses the objection that scientists have to the idea of light losing energy while traveling through the vacuum of space. Physicists will say light can only lose energy in a reaction, and this reaction would cause light photons to scatter. Kirsten is open to other ways light could lose energy without scattering. In **NPQG**, photons lose tiny quanta of energy as they travel through the spacetime æther—and although the mechanism is not yet understood it is thought to be related to galaxy local expansion of spacetime æther. Judging by how far light travels, my bet is that it is a non-scattering reaction that is rare, but amazingly consistent on a statistical basis (i.e., the wavelength of light will increase by a tiny amount for every light year).

Kirsten says "The map is not the territory!" which is a wonderful quote. I looked it up and here is an excellent explanation:

> _The map–territory relation describes the relationship between an object and a representation of that object, as in the relation between a geographical territory and a map of it. Polish-American scientist and philosopher Alfred Korzybski remarked that "the map is not the territory" and that "the word is not the thing", encapsulating his view that an abstraction derived from something, or a reaction to it, is not the thing itself. Korzybski held that many people do confuse maps with territories, that is, confuse models of reality with reality itself._
> 
> Wikipedia

Physicists and cosmologists often muse that their math may be, some say **_IS_** the same as reality. It is strikingly obvious how this pattern of thinking leads them astray. Dr. Sabine Hossenfelder wrote an excellent book, "Lost in Math," that describes this problem in the field of physics. Yet we all know that even beautiful math can at some level represent an approximation of a much more complicated system. The math may match experiments to amazing levels of accuracy and precision, yet still only represent a higher-level model, completely bypassing important foundational levels in favor of tackling complex and abstract goals. Leading-edge physics experiments circa 2020 are probing length scales of $latex \\mathbf{~10^{-19}} &s=1$ yet **NPQG** teaches that the fundamental particles of nature, the electrino and positrino, are Planck-scale particles with a radius on the order of $latex \\mathbf{\\frac{h}{tau} = \\frac{h}{2\\pi} = ~10^{-35}.}&s=1$ That is a sixteen order of magnitude difference! It is entirely possible that general relativity and quantum mechanics are extremely successful, yet also do not describe nature from a fundamental implementation. In fact we know that neither GR nor QM does, and physicists will acknowledge that.

Kirsten discusses the role of religion in science at the 11:00 timestamp. How does the desire for an origin story play into the formulation of and adherence to the Big Bang theory? Isn't it comforting to know there was a beginning 13.8 billion years ago? A religious person could reconcile their religious text's origin story to the Big Bang if they are an abstract thinker. In doing so, they would be building another castle in the air, since NPQG teaches that bangs are galaxy local and the universe age is unknown and possibly infinite. Likewise, as I wrote in [Religion Meet NPQG](https://johnmarkmorris.com/2019/06/11/religion-meet-npqg/), storytellers will find plenty of opportunity to cast mythologies around NPQG, especially with regards to SMBH recycling.

At 15:00 Kirsten explains the differences between a ΛCDM cosmology with an expanding universe in curvy spacetime which originated from an inflationary Big Bang, versus a steady-state universe in flat 3-D space with tiring light. She analyzes the options and discards ΛCDM in favor of the latter theory.

**NPQG** also postulates that there was no one-time inflationary Big Bang—instead, matter-energy is recycled in supermassive black holes which periodically erupt new molten matter-energy plasma from their poles as jets that extend for scores of light years. This SMBH recycling process occurs throughout the universe, thus eliminating any need to rely on a Big Bang. If you are following along, that means we have no idea how old the universe is, and for all we know it may be infinitely old.

The universe does not expand outward as a whole in **NPQG**. When a black hole erupts in polar jets, it results in an inflationary galaxy-bang of plasma and spacetime æther that expands _within_ the galaxy and in _opposition_ to the same process in neighboring galaxies. NPQG provides universe wide expansion, but inward in opposition, not larger as a whole.

Furthermore, in **NPQG**, it is possible for light to lose small amounts of energy without scattering, i.e., redshift, while traveling through spacetime æther. And last but not least, the speed of light is local and depends on the energy of spacetime æther, which increases around concentrations of matter-energy. In **NPQG** tired light always travels at the local speed of light; it is only the energy of the photon that very, very, slowly peters away. Kirsten and I agree that a photon will lose energy as it travels through spacetime, but differ on this point—she says tired light will decrease in speed as it travels. That said, I do think that at some very low point in the energy loss curve, a photon may drop in speed or react with another tired photon and meld into the spacetime aether.

**NPQG** offers several potential solutions for the problem which has been labeled 'dark matter' :

- Energy shielding within particle structure. NPQG predicts that generation I fermions contain and shield generation II fermion energy which in turn contains and shields generation III fermion energy. Shielding may be partial or whole depending on the structure and its velocity.

- Effects from enormous matter-energy reappearing via the occasional eruption of the polar jets.

From the point of view of a galaxy, there is a constant drain of mass (apparent energy) in the active galaxtic nucleus of the black hole as the black hole ingests matter-energy. When the Planck core periodically erupts, then a huge amount of gravitating matter energy appears along the polar jet path and terminus which begins exchanging energy with spacetime aether, which is the basis of gravitation.

Inflationary Big Bang physicists claim that there was an epoch during inflation where particles traveled faster than the speed of light, but **_only_** then and **_never_** since \[32:35\]. Kirsten points out how much this sounds like sand castles in the air. It turns out **NPQG** can explain this parsimoniously. If we transform the one-time inflationary big bang into a parallel intermittent eruption of Planck plasma jets from supermassive black holes throughout the in galaxies throughout the universe, then it is very plausible that those jets can be superluminal. In **NPQG** it is spacetime æther itself that determines the speed of light (based on spacetime æther energy, permittivity and permeability). However, those Planck plasma jets are more fundamental than spacetime particles — they can pierce right through spacetime æther and clear it out of the way for scores of light years. Once they do that, there is nothing to limit the speed of the jet. Therefore, we have the situation that the physics of the inflationary Big Bang can be partially preserved and recast if we abandon the one-time Big Bang narrative and switch the narrative to Planck plasma jets from myriad SMBH.

Kirsten mentions that one of the many difficulties in reconciling general relativity and quantum mechanics is that GR utilizes a curved coordinate system, while QM uses a flat coordinate system \[37:00\]. A tired light cosmology in a flat universe helps resolve that tension. I agree and I see this as good news for **NPQG**. We will also see that general relativity plays an important role in the energy storage mechanism of structure that emerges from point charges.

Kirsten discusses the work of Halton Arp, a very good scientist who was shunned by the physics community because his ideas did not conform \[42:00\]. Like Kirsten, I think Halton Arp was on to something. Unfortunately, the data available at the time was so limited and noisy that he was shot down and isolated. Eric Weinstein calls this the Distributed Idea Suppression Complex (D.I.S.C.) in discussions on his podcast, "The Portal," and Eric sees this as a major failing of science and other institutions today. I wrote about Halton Arp in this blog post: [A New Model for BL-LACs With Help from Planck and Arp](https://johnmarkmorris.com/2019/06/13/a-new-model-for-bl-lacs-with-help-from-planck-and-arp/).

Kirsten talks about the observation of faster-than-light quasar jets and the improbable explanation from physicists that the jets happen to be aimed towards us at narrow angle, and thus are not truly superluminal \[44:00\]. This relates to the paragraph above from timestamp \[32:35\]. The bottom line is that there are several more causes of redshift than modern physicists realize. The implication is that much of modern astronomy will need to be reframed and recast. It would be good to recast astronomy now before the new-fangled space telescopes like the James Webb come online and verify these new predictions.

_**J Mark Morris : San Diego : California**_
