---
title: "The Trials and Tribulations of an Independent Ideator"
date: 2020-08-17
categories: 
  - "nature"
tags: 
  - "linked"
---



As for me, I have been ideating on a TOE for 2.5 years and have a unique approach of starting where Planck left off, with Planck scale point charge particles that can carry from 0 to Planck energy and are charged, immutable and conserved. Take duos of those particles and toss them into a 3D Euclidean void at a certain particle density and energy density (two free parameters) and the universe will emerge.  Using just logic alone you can come to some fantastic ideas. If they are immutable, there is no singularity. Then what happens?  Well maybe those SMBH are jetting them out? So you go through all the outreach material and you find out that bang theory doesn't require a single place or time. And you find out that inflation must still be going on, but we can't see it. And you find out about pocket universes and multiverses from Dr. Guth.

And then you have to deal with some of the issues. What about the event horizon? Surely a core of Planck particles at Planck energy in an SMBH could overpower an event horizon of its own making, right? Maybe spin is involved, maybe the frame dragging around the polar axis creates a vortex that allows lower energy spacetime aether to approach the event horizon and bang, the jet breaches.  Ok, so what about expansion?  Ok, you scratch your head on your fledgling ideas and it dawns on you, hey wait a second, if spacetime is an aether and each galaxy AGN SMBH occasionally and independently erupts in a bang and if Planck plasma inflates from Planck density to what we can observe, then you struggle and it dawns on you - what if expansion is galaxy local! Sure, that makes sense, if inflation comes from the jet each galaxy will expand INTO its neighbors. So now you have repositioned the **bang, crunch, and expansion** local to galaxies.  And galaxies are your 'pocket universes' in the multiverse. Much more parsimonious. Oh, and you get **crunch** for free because it is a black hole and that is nice for all the bright scientists who's math shows a crunch (Roger, Lee, etc.).  And you have expansion but not universe outward, galaxy outward, so it's in opposition and nothing is going anywhere fast and now the Hubble tension goes away and you realize that oh, those measurements vary because photons take different paths through different galaxies, each of which is in a different stage of a general recycling process.  Yeah, you still have some issues to work out with the idea of an 'accelerating' universe but you have enough mechanisms now that you will chip away at that issue.

Spacetime aether is an assembly made of point charges and it provides a Riemannian geometry, except at the smallest scales. So you happen across UV divergence, and IR divergence, and renormalization and you think -- uh oh, those integrals bounds don't go to zero or infinity. There are cutoffs where things are going to get chunky and discrete.  Meanwhile, since you started with a Euclidean void, you realize that Einstein's inertial observer needs to be repositioned from low energy spacetime into the Euclidean void. And you realize that nature is a trickster to provide two overlapping geometries sandwiched together like that. And you realize you will need to rewrite the basic equations from the perspective of the Euclidean observer. Since it is an aether, you realize the Euclidean observer will see a variable speed of light, while the Riemannian observer IN the aether will see a constant speed of light because the particles of the aether must guarantee a relationship between their radius and their frequency. That relationship is sort of counterintuitive because at higher energies, those aether particles get smaller and their frequency decreases - but that fits with Einstein and curvature and dilation and contraction.  Oh, that means that the aether has a permittivity and a permeability from the point of view of the Euclidean observer and that is nice for the formula c^2 = 1/sqrt(permittivity \* permeability) if they vary with the energy in the aether and that makes sense.

Every once in a while you pop your head up to share what you are finding with the physicists and the cosmologists and they beat the crap out of you.  So, you are like, well ok, if you don't want to be involved picking all this low hanging fruit, then no problem. Unfortunately it delays the benefits for intelligent life and the environment. So back to picking fruit. You think more about your Planck core in a SMBH and you realize that as speed of light slows in the Euclidean reality that ingested particles will not be moving in the Planck core. All the energy will be in electric field of attraction and repulsion. No magnetism (not moving), no kinetic energy. Oh that's why the temperature is zero!.  Oh, that's only one microstate, therefore no entropy. Oh there's certainly no information in a Planck core.  Well arguably one bit, Planck core or not Planck core.  So you think well that knocks down a few more paradoxes and open problems. Might also mean we need to adjust the Second Law to an equality considering we haven't been accounting for the aeither.  Of course, you realize, the aether is the grand accountant for all things conserved! So you think about how physicists are all wrapped up in their issues with some kinds of symmetries not being conserved, yet they don't understand the aether, and you think well, that math is way over my head, but I wonder if the aether is actually doing the conservation and they don't know it. Set that aside, too much intense math.  Can't pick all the fruit.

So you surface again to tell folks and again they greet you with hostility and bullying.  You can not do physics without our 10^-20 math! You cannot do physics without understanding everything we have done! Really?  Well your outreach stuff is actually pretty good. I don't have a career to worry about. I have the luxury of listening to all the tells when scientists aren't sure about things and how they each tell a somewhat different narrative. And I recognize that narrative is interpretation and is a degree of freedom I have as long as I preserve the observations and most of their math. And when you come back kindly and say, but don't you understand emergence they just get madder. And when you say, don't you understand you are looking at structure that is 15 orders of magnitude above where I am ideating, they just get madder. And then you try to give examples, like thinking about probing around the outside of a computer and what could you discover about the CPU chip, and if you took off the cover and probed around the circuit board what would you know, and if you probed around the CPU's pins and developed techniques to probe the ball grid array what would you know, and if you figured out how to take off the package and keep it running what would you know with your probe? Do you know anything yet about semiconductors or junctions or gates. Nope. Still it doesn't get through because they are in so deep.   So then you say things like you are climbing K2 or Everest the hard way, I found a nice heated paved gently sloped path on the other side.  No dice.

So you go back to cosmology and think about all the new mechanisms that could explain galaxy rotation curves. First you have this spacetime aether generator erupting every so often for however long it erupts. So you have this inflationary aether wind. Maybe that has an effect.  And you have this kind of interesting observation that the point charges in a Planck core have no way to transmit their gravitational mass since all their neighbor particles are maxed out. Wow, so that means that as matter is ingested, that if a Planck core has formed and the ingested matter-energy joins it, it falls off the accounting books for a while, until it jets out if it ever does. So that's interesting for the orbitals of the stuff in the galaxy that had been attracted to that stuff which is no longer gravitating.  You think well the surface of the Planck core is still presenting it's mass and that core must grow while the SMBH is not jetting and shrink when it is jetting and that's interesting because the surface area is varying over large time scales, but you don't know what to do with that. Can't pick all the fruit. And you realize that when those jets blow that is a lot of mass that all of a sudden reappears and probably does something to galaxy dynamics, but haven't figured out what yet. 


