

My thought experiments have led to the idea of the positive and negative point potentials which emit Dirac sphere potentials that expand at velocity @ and have a radial magnitude |**_δ_**/r|, where r = @t, emitted along the unit potential path history in absolute Euclidean time and space. The velocity of the unit potentials also plays two key roles, first in establishing the gradient of the Dirac sphere potential stream, and second in determining the action when a unit potential encounters a Dirac sphere emitted by itself or any other unit potential. That's pretty much it. Nature is really that simple at the foundation. Emergent assembly does the rest.

You'll notice that the speed of light, c, does not appear in the foundation of nature. Why? The reason is that light is made of photons, and photons are assemblies made of unit potential point potentials. It appears that photon assembles sail on their own scalar and vector potentials, or rather that the accumulated action from each of the point potentials in a photon on themselves and their partners in the photon assembly serves to both propagate the photon and couple the assembly together. Thus the speed of light, c, is really an effect, not a cause. In low energy spacetime aether, the photon speed, v = c, approaches the speed of the Dirac sphere potentials v = @, but can not exceed it **_at the assembly level._**

The implications are that science has erred by smuggling the speed of the photon, c, into fundamental equations, such as those of Jefimenko and Liénard–Wiechert which are derived from classical point charges. This in turn has caused a huge miss of a major sector of physical dynamical geometry that describes nature and causality, the idea that the unit potential velocity is not constrained by the speed of the photon c, or even by the speed of the Dirac sphere potentials @. Instead, it is possible for the unit potential point potential velocity to exceed @ and this leads to enormously powerful new insights about nature and causality.


